Certified single-node installation guide (#380)
astronomer/docs: enterprise/v0.25/10_certified-image/single-node-install.md

---
title: "Install Astronomer Certified on a Single Virtual Machine"
navTitle: "Single Node Installation"

> description: "Configure a simple Astronomer Certified environment on a single virtual machine."

Reviewer: ```suggestion
description: "Configure a simple Apache Airflow environment with Astronomer Certified on a single virtual machine."
```

Too much? Wanted to get the Airflow SEO in there. Nbd either way.

Reviewer 2: I love your suggestion. Subconsciously reinforces the link between Airflow and Astro

If you want to run Astronomer's distribution of Airflow without using Docker, you can install the Astronomer Certified Python wheel on either one or many virtual machines.

This guide provides steps for installing the Python wheel onto a single virtual machine. By the end of the setup, you'll have a simple development environment for Airflow running on your local machine.

Note that this setup represents one possible configuration of Astronomer Certified and uses optional tools such as systemd and PostgreSQL. After successfully starting Airflow for the first time, we recommend reviewing this configuration and adjusting it based on the functional requirements for your project.

For other possible Astronomer Certified installations, see the following guides:

- [Install Astronomer Certified on a Multi-Node Cluster]
- [Install Astronomer Certified at Production Scale]

## Prerequisites

Once you've decided which machine you'll be installing Astronomer Certified on, ensure that the following OS-level packages are installed on the machine:

- sudo
- python3

> - python3-dev (python3-devel for RHEL/CentOS)

Reviewer 2: Are we supporting Airflow on Redhat? Docker Images are debian-based, and I'm wondering if we are shooting ourselves in the foot

Author: I'm cool with taking out the parenthetical, but I'll defer to @paolaperaza for support decisions. This is leftover from our _original_ installation guide, which had its own suite of issues.

- python3-venv
- python3-psycopg2
- gcc
- postgresql
- systemd

If you're running on a Debian-based OS, you can install these with the following command:

```
sudo apt-get install sudo python3 python3-dev python3-venv python3-psycopg2 gcc postgresql systemd
```

You also need a database on the machine that will run your Airflow instance. This guide walks through the process for configuring a PostgreSQL database, but Airflow is compatible with all of the following databases:

- PostgreSQL: 9.6, 10, 11, 12, 13
- MySQL: 5.7, 8
- SQLite: 3.15.0+

> > **Note:** MySQL 5.7 is compatible with Airflow, but is not recommended for users running Airflow 2.0+, as it does not support the ability to run more than 1 Scheduler. If you'd like to leverage Airflow's new [Highly-Available Scheduler](https://www.astronomer.io/blog/airflow-2-scheduler), make sure you're running MySQL 8.0+.

Reviewer 2: 😍

> ## Step 1: Set Up Airflow's Metadata Database

Reviewer 2: I agree. While I don't know if we can outright say we don't support mysql, I think we can say that PostgreSQL is strongly(?) recommended, or at least preferred?

> ## Step 1: Set Up Airflow's Metadata Database

Author: As long as we note this in the above section on database support, I think it's okay to assume postgres for the rest of the guide.

```sh
sudo -u astro ~astro/airflow-venv/bin/pip install --extra-index-url=https://pip.astronomer.io/simple/ 'astronomer-certified[postgres, celery, redis]==2.0.1.*' --constraint "https://raw.githubusercontent.com/apache/airflow/constraints-2.0.1/constraints-3.8.txt"
```

This command includes the optional `postgres`, `celery`, and `redis` dependencies so that all libraries for those tools are also installed. If your environment requires extra functionality, specify additional dependencies in a comma-delimited list:

```
astronomer-certified[mysql, redis, celery, crypto, aws]==2.0.1.*
```

For a list of all optional dependencies, refer to the [AC pip index](https://pip.astronomer.io/simple/index.html).

## Step 6: Configure a Process Supervisor

To ensure that Airflow is always running when your machine is on, we recommend implementing a process supervisor. [Systemd](https://systemd.io/) is used in this example, though any process supervisor works here.

To use systemd as a process supervisor:

1. Create a systemd unit file using the following command:

    ```sh
    sudo -e /etc/systemd/system/astronomer-certified@.service
    ```

> 2. Using a text editor, create a file called `sys-config` and edit it to contain these environment variables and values:

Reviewer 3: could be helpful to add "create and edit a file called `/usr/local/airflow/sys-config` - which wasn't immediately obvious to me on the first read of where you wanted it

Reviewer 2: Or `${AIRFLOW_HOME}/sys-config` in case they chose a different home directory

Author: @cmarteepants Will this environment variable work in all system processes? As in, can I replace `usr/local/airflow` across the guide with `${AIRFLOW_HOME}` across the guide, and the setup will still work as long as they run `echo 'export AIRFLOW_HOME=/usr/local/airflow'`?

Reviewer 2: to clarify, it will work as long as they export the environment variable AND write to `.bashrc`. 

aka `echo 'export AIRFLOW_HOME=/usr/local/airflow' | sudo tee --append ~astro/.bashrc` -- the second part is important :)

    ```sh
    AIRFLOW_HOME=/usr/local/airflow/
    AIRFLOW__CORE__LOAD_EXAMPLES=False
    PATH=$PATH:/home/astro/airflow-venv/bin
    ```

    If you want to configure environment variables for a single Airflow service, we recommend doing so in the `sys-config` file for the machine on which the service is running.

3. Add the following to your systemd unit file:

    ```
    [Unit]
    Description=Airflow %I daemon
    After=network-online.target cloud-config.service

>     Requires=network-online.target

Reviewer 3: I'm uncertain if these targets are always going to be correct? Could be worth asking for QA on that

    After=network-online.target cloud-config.service
    Requires=network-online.target

    [Service]
    EnvironmentFile=/usr/local/airflow/sys-config
    User=astro
    Group=astro
    Type=simple
    WorkingDirectory=/usr/local/airflow/
    ExecStart=/home/astro/airflow-venv/bin/airflow %i
    Restart=always
    RestartSec=5s

    [Install]
    WantedBy=multi-user.target
    ```

> ## Step 7: Configure Airflow for Database Access

Author: Weird, it's looking normal to me in my Atom preview. I think Github sometimes has a hard time with rendering code fences in lists, but this has worked on our site in the past.

> ## Step 7: Configure Airflow for Database Access

Reviewer: Will trust! Resolving

```
AIRFLOW__CORE__SQL_ALCHEMY_CONN_CMD=vault kv get -field=dsn secret/airflow-db
```

For more information on this feature, read [Integrating Airflow and Hashicorp Vault](/guides/airflow-and-hashicorp-vault).

## Step 8: Set Up the Scheduler

In Airflow, [the Scheduler](https://airflow.apache.org/docs/apache-airflow/stable/scheduler.html) is responsible for reading from the metadata database to check on the status of each task and decides the order in which tasks should be completed. To get your Scheduler running:  

1. Enable the Scheduler by running the following command:

    ```sh
    sudo systemctl enable astronomer-certified@scheduler.service
    ```

2. Edit the override file for the machine by running the following command:

    ```sh
    sudo systemctl edit astronomer-certified@scheduler.service
    ```

3. In the override file, add the following lines:

    ```
    [Service]
    ExecStartPre=/home/astro/airflow-venv/bin/airflow db upgrade

>     ```

Author: Added a note below this.

>     > **Note** If your version of Airflow is <2.0, the command specified here will instead be `airflow upgradedb`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    > **Note** If you're running Airflow 1.10, the command specified here will instead be `airflow upgradedb`.
```
